therapy seems useless should i stop
trying
no
i feel like i'm doing all the right
things yet if i continue this trajectory
i will never make progress in life
after watching dr kane healthy gamer for
some quite some time now i realize that
the root burden and obstacle in my life
is my crushingly low self-esteem and
dominating shame i started therapy at
the beginning of the year and have only
improved in my lexithymia and gained eq
but my immense shame and low self-esteem
seems impenetrable my therapist is
pretty much
has tried pretty much everything
cb style cbt style work for the inner
critic emdr hypnotherapy asking me about
earlier times i felt ashamed about
myself talk about times where i felt
competent
contempt from my parents but my memory
is so poor to where i can't even
remember any specific incident
only that something kind of vaguely sort
of happened because understanding my
origins doesn't seem to be an avenue but
because of how useless cbt approach type
approaches feel i genuinely think that
therapy has nothing to offer me
um as for why this is an issue i'm
unable to live the life that i want i
signed up for coaching but i am inclined
to believe that coaching will not help
me why because i know that my my low
self-esteem the not good enough and they
will hate you to oblivion thoughts in my
head are the root of the problem and
underlying obstacle
so now they go into their different
interviews and stuff
i've told my therapist everything and i
think even
he was not sure how to help me entirely
i found a new therapist but honestly i
think my problems are beyond what
therapy can help i don't think coaching
can help me either because i know what
my problem is and what i need to do to
reach my goals but it's simply just not
working
tldr
it's an infinite cycle
can't improve overwhelming shame and
insecurity
can't do job interviews because of shame
can't get better job stuck in current
brain dead job slipping back into
depression because hate job in life
can't focus on making better resume feel
even more stupid reinforcing shame and
insecurity can't improve shame and
insecurity etc the cycle repeats
so there's a lot of important
things to tease apart in this language
okay
so
therapy seems useless
i will never make progress in life
i feel like i'm doing all the right
things
okay
um
can't improve
overwhelming shame and insecurity
started therapy at the beginning of this
year have only improved in my alexa
thymia and gained eq okay
so so what we're going to talk about
right now is how shame literally shapes
your thoughts and projections
okay
so the first thing to understand about
therapy is that
it doesn't solve everything at once you
have to start somewhere okay
and so if you're someone who has
crippling shame and it sounds like this
person has had shame for a while
you know starting therapy at the
beginning of the year and after eight
months not being fixed i don't think is
like
unusual
so if you've made some progress in
therapy after eight months but your
self-esteem and dominating shame feels
overwhelming
that's actually like pretty good and i'd
say keep at it because if you've had
this this if this cycle has been
repeating
for like years
like eight months of therapy isn't gonna
be enough to fix it right like you said
it's very impenetrable right now it
doesn't seem like it's gonna change
so
the more
the harder the shame is to overcome the
longer time it's gonna take to overcome
it
and the harder it's going to be to see
the progress that you're making
so there's also something that's kind of
dangerous going on here
which i want to kind of highlight i
don't know if this is going to make
sense
but this is almost like more for
clinicians
so this reads to me like a desperate
clinician patient
scenario so sometimes as a doctor
i will come i will talk to patients who
are like desperate they'll come in and
they say i have this unsolvable problem
and then i'll get freaked out and i'm
like oh my god this person has an
insolvable problem like what am i going
to do let me try this let me try emdr
let me do cbt didn't work okay let's
what's next another medication let's try
this medication that medication let's
try this thing and this thing in this
thing
and then what happens the really tricky
thing is that the more desperate i
become as a clinician like what happens
to the client's hope
it like gets worse and worse and worse
right because each thing that you try
and fails
teaches both of you the lesson
that like nothing works
right it's a very devastating and
dangerous conclusion to come to and so
the more things that you try and the
more things that fail
like the more hopeless you become which
improves the cycle of desperation right
like so then i become more desperate as
a provider and now like i'm forced to
tell the client i've tried everything i
could and nothing is working you are
hopeless i'm sorry i don't know how to
help you i've done everything in my
playbook and then you this person goes
to the next therapist and they say i've
done therapy i've done five things and
i'm a failure i'm too hard to treat so i
don't know if this is going to help and
so they come in and their attitude
shapes everything so when five different
therapies fail i don't think it's a
problem with the therapy i think it's
something about the relationship or the
person
so that kind of desperation i know
sounds kind of weird leads to bad
outcomes there's this thing called the
no sibo effect which is the opposite of
the placebo effect which we know that
for example 70 percent
of antidepressant medication
is due to placebo effect so if i reduce
your depression by 50
okay
about
35 to 40 percent of that improvement is
placebo
it's belief the pharmacologic value of
antidepressant medication is only about
30 percent
so the nocebo effect is the opposite it
means that if if a patient goes into a
treatment
not believing believing that it won't
work
so let's be precise believing that it
won't work the likelihood of that
treatment to fail skyrockets
okay
so it's kind of interesting because this
person's cognitive bias could be
negatively impacting the therapy
relationship and the therapist is i
don't really know what's going on but i
as a clinician have been in that place
where i feel that desperation i become
desperate and then as a therapist i walk
into the room every single day desperate
every time the person shows up in my
office i'm feeling desperate i'm not
showing it but i'm feeling it on the
inside and then that's going to shape
the way that i interact with that person
i don't feel hopeful as a therapist and
then what chance does a client have if i
start to feel hopeless right it's like
gg game over it's like you're hopeless
i'm hopeless
so first thing to do is to just take a
step back and slow down
all right like don't worry about whether
it's gonna work or not work it's giving
you some benefits
learn to kind of sit with that shame
talk about with your therapist what it's
like to have this this unsolvable
problem right what does it feel like to
have an unsolvable problem
how do you manage that like how do you
get up in the morning like wow life is
tough dude like that sounds really hard
right and then over time what's gonna
happen is you have all of this shame and
this is how i think therapy or what we
try to do with coaches because coaches
they they help people with shame but
like here's here's how coaches help with
shame okay therapists are maybe actually
a little bit better than this but
so i want y'all to understand that if
you like in this person's brain there's
like a cycle of thoughts right and we
can see them kind of fighting against
them
so pay attention to this
right so can't focus
stuck can't can't can't do you guys
understand that these words are coming
out of the thoughts in this person's
brain
so what happens and this person goes in
now into like held three jobs and then
like i feel like my brain is rotting and
i can no longer do this this is going to
contribute to nocebo effect
okay
so it's kind of weird but what can you
do what i would advise a coach who is
working with this client
is first you have to model as a coach
how to tolerate shame so as this person
is this person like you know goes to
therapy and feels really ashamed and
hopeless
if the therapist can sit with that
hopelessness or the coach can sit with
that hopelessness and not feel hopeless
in turn you're going to show the person
how to do that right if we think about
like self-dialogue how do we change our
self-dialogue it usually start i mean
you can change it on your own but when
you work with a coach the way that our
coaches like change self-dialogue is by
giving you an alternate option
so when you fail to apply for a job and
you tell yourself oh my god it's because
i'm like so hopeless and i have this
impenetrable shame woe is me and your
coach is like wow that sucks it sounds
like you were really hard on yourself
and you genuinely have a lot of like
difficult challenges that you're dealing
with it sounds like you're paralyzed by
your shame and like that's part of the
reason that you feel stuck i know it
sounds kind of weird but like they're
sort of giving you a pass right they're
like treating you with compassion and
then something weird happens in your
brain like when people start like
consistently treating you with like
compassion and they don't kind of beat
you up on a regular basis
your brain learns how to talk to itself
and then over time what happens is that
like you'll start to chip away at that
chain right if you continue to work with
a therapist and your therapist is
supportive
and continues to demonstrate hope then
you'll start to like model that behavior
you'll pick it up almost like slang so
we know that human beings learn through
observation of like other kinds of
behaviors even if you look at like the
way that people walk right like people
in different parts of the country or
different parts of the world will like
walk in a different way if the way that
people talk the way that they have body
language in the way that they like you
know greet each other like some people
will shake hands some people will hug
like i remember when i moved to boston
first from texas like i used to be a big
handshaker and like like people they're
like shaking hands but it's not like a
big thing
and then when i went to india it's like
even more confusing because they do
namaste right so there's no bodily
contact
so all of these things like you have to
learn by like sitting with someone or an
efficient way to learn i should say is
by sitting with someone and having them
literally like model the right response
and over time as you learn to sit with
the shame and tolerate the shame and
recognize oh that shame is there and
it's actually not my fault
that
i'm failing because as long as like that
that shame is like weighing me down
how could i how should i even expect
myself to be able to do anything the
shame is so crippling
i can't do anything and then something
funny happens there because if you start
to say that then you've forgiven
yourself then the shame is over here and
that's what's causing the shame is
causing you to fail it's not i am
failing the shame is making me fail and
then you externalize it and then your
value becomes separate from the shame
and then you can start building that
back up
okay yeah so when someone says i'm
ashamed and i'm ashamed of that
absolutely it's a cycle it's like it's
elephants all the way down chat
you can you can get lost in that cycle
as much as you want to breaking out of
that cycle literally oftentimes the
fastest way to do it is to sit with
someone so i'd say continue therapy
right even arguably with with the person
you've got you can try someone else by
all means try someone else
but go there and learn to sit with that
shame have them sit with the shame have
them teach you how to sit with the shame
sit with it because as long as you are
sitting with it it is outside of you do
you all get that like if i'm sitting on
a park bench with someone else like that
person isn't me it is outside of me at
that point so learning to sit with shame
is like i'm over here the shame is over
there but if it's over there then it's
no longer a part of me and then all of
these things i am a failure is not
correct you can't say that if you're
sitting sitting with shame
um
so you can't you can't say that right
like
once you sit with the shame then i'm
over here and then the shame is over
there
okay
does that make sense
so i wouldn't give up on therapy
and and if i say just have hope you
can't just have hope if you don't have
hope that's okay but if you've signed up
for coaching it's your coach's job to be
hopeful for you and teach you how to be
helpful and that's totally fine like
that's fair
you must everyone i want you to
understand you must do the the shooting
with the shame
with it it's wonderful
you